Kubio kubio.json v0.25 Proposal
Status: Under review
Base: v0.24


1. Scope

v0.25 adds one global token-bucket rate limit. It is an admission limit for
the whole Kubio process, not a per-client, per-host, per-route, or per-method
quota. It does not add authentication, authorization, metrics, configurable
logs, or custom error bodies.


2. Configuration

The root may set `limit`:

    {
      "limit": {
        "rate": 1000,
        "burst": 2000
      }
    }

`limit.rate` is the number of tokens replenished per second and must be a
JSON base-10 integer from 1 through 1,000,000. `limit.burst` is the bucket
capacity and must be a JSON base-10 integer from 1 through 1,000,000. Both
fields are required; the bucket starts full. A request consumes one token.
Fractional token replenishment is retained between requests using a
monotonic elapsed time. The bucket never holds more than `burst` tokens.

The object is valid only at the configuration root. Nulls, non-objects,
unknown fields, aliases, duplicate keys, missing fields, non-integer values,
decimals, exponents, and out-of-range values are errors. When `limit` is
absent, rate limiting is disabled.


3. Admission behavior

When enabled, Kubio evaluates the limiter once for every incoming HTTP
request, after request-ID resolution and before `OPTIONS *` handling, site
selection, route matching, or proxying. If a token is available, the request
continues normally. If no token is available, Kubio returns HTTP 429 with an
empty body and does not contact an upstream or evaluate a route. It does not
emit `Retry-After` and does not wait for a token.

The existing request-ID feature, when enabled, owns the response ID for a
429 response. A rejected request is recorded by the existing access log with
status 429 and zero bytes when logging is enabled. No custom error-body or
response-header policy applies to a limiter-generated response.

The limiter is global across all sites, hosts, routes, methods, listeners,
and generated responses in the process. It does not inspect client identity,
forwarded headers, path, method, or request body.


4. Reload and failure behavior

Kubio constructs the limiter as immutable generation state. A valid reload
publishes the new rate and burst atomically and starts the new bucket full;
in-flight requests retain the generation that admitted them. A reload with
invalid limit configuration is logged and leaves the current generation and
its limiter state unchanged. If `limit` is removed, the new generation has
rate limiting disabled.


5. Performance and concurrency constraints

The disabled mode adds no limiter clock read, allocation, lock, or atomic
operation to request handling. The enabled mode performs one non-blocking,
thread-safe token reservation with no sleeping and no global mutex; concurrent
requests are linearized by the limiter state. Configuration parsing and
generation construction perform no request admission.


6. Deferred scope

The following remain unresolved and move to the next proposal:

- Custom bodies for Kubio-generated errors.
- Metrics, configurable log sinks/formats, and health/admin/reload endpoints.
- Forwarded and PROXY protocols.
- Listener client authentication, inbound mutual TLS, TLS passthrough,
  configurable TLS policy, ACME, multiple listener certificates, and listener
  SNI certificate selection.
- Authentication, authorization, compression, caching, service discovery,
  response trailers, conditional response headers, request-header policies,
  adaptive retry policies, and policies for Kubio-generated or intermediate
  responses.
