Kubio kubio.json v0.2 Specification
Status: Agreed specification
Base: v0.1


1. Scope

v0.2 adds named backends containing one or more upstream targets and
deterministic round-robin selection.

All v0.1 behavior remains unchanged unless a site or route selects a backend.
Every valid v0.1 configuration remains valid in v0.2.


2. Configuration

The optional top-level backends field is an object. It defaults to an empty
object.

    {
      "listen": ":8080",
      "backends": {
        "app": {
          "targets": [
            "http://app-1:3000",
            "http://app-2:3000"
          ]
        }
      },
      "sites": [
        {
          "hosts": ["example.com"],
          "backend": "app",
          "routes": [
            {
              "path": "/legacy/*",
              "target": "http://legacy:3000"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

Each property name in backends is a backend name. Names:

- Must be non-empty.
- Are case-sensitive.
- Are matched exactly without trimming or normalization.

Each backend object has exactly one field:

- targets: required non-empty array of strings.

Every targets element must be a valid v0.1 target URL. Duplicate target strings
within one backend are configuration errors. Unknown backend fields are errors.


3. Site and route selection

A site must contain exactly one of:

- target: a v0.1 target URL.
- backend: a non-empty string naming a defined backend.

Specifying both or neither is a configuration error.

A route may contain:

- target,
- backend, or
- neither.

Specifying both target and backend is a configuration error. A route specifying
neither inherits the site's target or backend. A route specifying either field
replaces the site's selection completely.

The selected route does not merge backend or target selection with another
route. Header inheritance, route priority, path matching, stripping, and all
other v0.1 behavior are unchanged.

Every backend reference must match a backend defined in the same configuration.
Unused backend definitions are valid.


4. Round-robin behavior

Each named backend has one selector shared by every site and route that
references it.

A newly built backend starts at targets index 0. Each request resolved to that
backend atomically:

1. Selects the current index.
2. Advances the index to the next array position, wrapping to index 0.
3. Uses the selected target for that request.

Concurrent selections are serialized into one total selection order. Therefore,
for a backend with targets A, B, and C, the selection sequence is always A, B,
C, A, B, C in that order. Concurrent request arrival or scheduling does not
change this sequence, although it may change which request obtains each
position.

Selection occurs once when Kubio prepares the upstream request. A selection is
consumed even if the client disconnects or the upstream request fails. Direct
target requests do not affect backend state. Different named backends have
independent state.


5. Failures

Failures after target selection are handled identically to failures for a direct
target. They consume the selection and do not select another target. Upstream
HTTP statuses are passed through and consume the selection normally.


6. Validation and reload

The v0.1 JSON, unknown-field, duplicate-key, startup, and atomic reload rules
continue to apply.

Validation additionally rejects:

- A non-object backends value.
- An empty backend name.
- A non-object backend definition.
- A missing, non-array, or empty targets field.
- A non-string or v0.1-invalid target in targets.
- Duplicate target strings within one backend.
- An unknown field in a backend definition.
- A non-string or empty backend reference.
- A reference to an undefined backend.
- A site containing both target and backend, or neither.
- A route containing both target and backend.

A failed reload preserves the active router and all of its round-robin state.

On a successful reload, the new router receives new backend selectors. Every
backend starts again at targets index 0, including an unchanged backend with the
same name and targets. In-flight requests continue with the previous router and
its state; requests entering the new router use the reset state.


7. Deferred features

v0.2 does not add retries or failover, health checks, or weighted targets. All
features deferred by v0.1 remain deferred.
