Kubio kubio.json v0.25 Specification
Status: Agreed specification
Base: v0.24


1. Scope

v0.25 adds one global token-bucket rate limit. It is an admission limit for
the whole Kubio process, not a per-client, per-host, per-route, or per-method
quota. It does not add authentication, authorization, metrics, configurable
logs, or custom error bodies.


2. Configuration

The root may set `limit`:

    {
      "limit": {
        "rate": 1000,
        "burst": 2000
      }
    }

`limit.rate` is the number of tokens replenished per second and must be a
JSON base-10 integer from 1 through 1,000,000. `limit.burst` is the bucket
capacity and must be a JSON base-10 integer from 1 through 1,000,000. Both
fields are required; the bucket starts full. A request consumes one token.
Kubio represents the balance in integer nanotoken units: one token is exactly
1,000,000,000 units and the capacity is exactly `burst * 1,000,000,000`
units. At each linearization point, Kubio samples the Go monotonic clock and
computes `elapsed = max(now - last, 0)`. `elapsed` is the non-negative integer
number of nanoseconds in the Go monotonic `time.Duration`, so `elapsed * rate`
is measured in nanotokens. It adds that amount, caps the balance at capacity,
and then admits exactly when the balance is at least 1,000,000,000 units,
subtracting that amount on admission. The timestamp is updated even when a
request is denied, provided `now >= last`;
an earlier sample leaves the timestamp and balance unchanged. Refill and
capacity arithmetic uses saturating overflow handling, so an overflow fills
the bucket to capacity. Exact-boundary availability admits, and fractional
replenishment is retained between requests.

The object is valid only at the configuration root. Nulls, non-objects,
unknown fields, aliases, duplicate keys, missing fields, non-integer values,
decimals, exponents, and out-of-range values are errors. When `limit` is
absent, rate limiting is disabled.


3. Admission behavior

When enabled, Kubio evaluates the limiter once for every incoming HTTP
request, after request-ID resolution and before `OPTIONS *` handling, site
selection, route matching, or proxying. If a token is available, the request
continues normally. If no token is available, Kubio calls `WriteHeader(429)`
once, writes zero body bytes, and does not contact an upstream or evaluate a
route. A rejection does not call `http.Error`, an upstream/error handler, or
any response-header policy. Kubio does not emit `Retry-After` and does not
wait for a token; the managed request ID is the only response header Kubio
may add.

The existing request-ID feature, when enabled, owns the response ID for a
429 response. A rejected request is recorded by the existing access log with
status 429 and zero bytes when logging is enabled. No custom error-body or
response-header policy applies to a limiter-generated response.

Request-ID resolution, including random-ID failure, occurs first. An
ID-generation failure follows the existing 500 path and consumes no token. A
limiter rejection occurs before the existing `OPTIONS *` body-discard logic,
so Kubio does not read or discard that request body.

The limiter is global across all sites, hosts, routes, methods, listeners,
and generated responses in the process. It does not inspect client identity,
forwarded headers, path, method, or request body.


4. Reload and failure behavior

Kubio owns one limiter admission state per process, shared by every runtime
generation. Candidate rate and burst parameters are parsed and validated
without touching the live state. A valid reload atomically publishes the new
runtime generation and replaces the process limiter parameters with a full
new bucket; admissions and publication are linearized against that shared
state. Admissions linearized before publication use the old state, and
admissions after publication use the new state. Requests already admitted
retain the runtime generation selected for them. A reload with invalid limit
configuration is logged and leaves the current generation and shared
limiter state unchanged. If `limit` is removed, the shared limiter is
disabled for the new generation. Any failed or unpublished generation,
including failures after limit parsing, leaves the current runtime generation
and shared limiter state unchanged; limiter publication occurs only with
successful generation publication.


5. Performance and concurrency constraints

The disabled mode adds no limiter clock read, allocation, lock, or atomic
operation to request handling. The enabled mode performs one non-blocking,
thread-safe token reservation with no sleeping and no global mutex; concurrent
requests are linearized by the shared limiter state. Configuration parsing
and generation construction perform no request admission.


6. Deferred scope

The following remain unresolved and move to the next proposal:

- Custom bodies for Kubio-generated errors.
- Metrics, configurable log sinks/formats, and health/admin/reload endpoints.
- Forwarded and PROXY protocols.
- Listener client authentication, inbound mutual TLS, TLS passthrough,
  configurable TLS policy, ACME, multiple listener certificates, and listener
  SNI certificate selection.
- Authentication, authorization, compression, caching, service discovery,
  response trailers, conditional response headers, request-header policies,
  adaptive retry policies, and policies for Kubio-generated or intermediate
  responses.
