Kubio kubio.json v0.4 Specification
Status: Agreed specification
Base: v0.3


1. Scope

v0.4 adds single-value response header replacement for responses received from
an upstream.

This is the only feature added by v0.4. All v0.3 behavior remains unchanged
when responseHeaders is absent, and every valid v0.3 configuration remains
valid in v0.4.


2. Configuration

A site or route may contain the optional responseHeaders object. In v0.4 it
contains exactly one field, set:

    {
      "listen": ":8080",
      "sites": [
        {
          "hosts": ["example.com"],
          "target": "http://app:3000",
          "responseHeaders": {
            "set": {
              "X-Content-Type-Options": "nosniff",
              "X-Proxy": "kubio"
            }
          },
          "routes": [
            {
              "path": "/private/*",
              "responseHeaders": {
                "set": {
                  "Cache-Control": "no-store",
                  "X-Proxy": "kubio-private"
                }
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

responseHeaders is valid only on site and route objects. It does not apply to
the top-level object or backend definitions.

When responseHeaders is present:

- It must be a non-null JSON object.
- set is required and must be a non-null, non-empty JSON object.
- Every set property maps one response header name to one JSON string.
- Unknown responseHeaders fields are configuration errors.

An absent responseHeaders field performs no response header replacement.


3. Header validation and environment expansion

Header names are validated and compared case-insensitively under the v0.1
header-name rules. Two set properties whose names differ only by case are a
configuration error within the same responseHeaders object.

The following response header names are managed by the proxy and cannot be
configured, regardless of case:

- Connection
- Proxy-Connection
- Keep-Alive
- Proxy-Authenticate
- Proxy-Authorization
- Transfer-Encoding
- TE
- Trailer
- Upgrade
- Content-Length

Each configured value may be an empty string. It must pass the v0.1 header
value validation and must not contain carriage return, line feed, DEL, or an
invalid control character.

The v0.1 environment-variable rules apply to response header values exactly as
they apply to request header values:

- ${NAME} is expanded once while loading kubio.json.
- An unset environment variable is a configuration error; a set but empty
  variable is valid.
- Shell-style \${NAME} represents the literal ${NAME}. In JSON the escaped
  form is written as "\\${NAME}".
- Expansion is not recursive, validation occurs after expansion, and expanded
  values must not be logged.

Response header values are sent to clients. Operators must not place secrets
in responseHeaders, whether written directly or supplied through environment
variables.

Header names do not support environment-variable expansion.


4. Site and route inheritance

For a request that receives an upstream response, Kubio forms one effective
set map as follows:

1. Start with every site responseHeaders.set entry, if present.
2. Overlay every responseHeaders.set entry from the selected route, if
   present.
3. A route entry replaces a site entry with the same case-insensitive name.

Site entries therefore apply to every upstream response handled by that site.
A selected route inherits site entries it does not replace. Only the selected
route contributes entries; method-ineligible and otherwise unselected routes
contribute nothing. If no route is selected, only the site entries apply.

Request headers and response headers are independent. The existing site and
route headers field continues to modify only the upstream request and has no
precedence relationship with responseHeaders.


5. Response behavior

Kubio applies the effective set map to the response header map after receiving
a final upstream response and before sending response headers to the client.
For each configured name, except an announced-trailer collision described
below, Kubio removes every value currently in the map with that
case-insensitive name and stores exactly one value: the configured string. An
empty configured string creates one present empty value; it does not remove
the header.

If the upstream response announces a trailer with the same case-insensitive
name as a set entry, Kubio skips that set entry. The upstream initial values
and trailer for that name follow the v0.3 behavior unchanged. An unannounced
trailer discovered after the response body is also forwarded unchanged and
does not retroactively change the earlier set decision.

Consequently, configuring Set-Cookie replaces every upstream Set-Cookie value
with one configured Set-Cookie value. v0.4 cannot configure multiple values for
one header.

Headers not named by the effective set map retain the v0.3 behavior. Kubio does
not change the upstream status, body, or trailers because of responseHeaders.
Response bodies remain streamed without full buffering, and WebSocket upgrades
remain supported.

The downstream HTTP server still applies normal protocol and status-specific
header serialization after the map is modified. It may canonicalize, combine,
or suppress fields as required by the downstream HTTP version and response
status. In particular, a configured Content-Type is stored in the response
header map for a 304 Not Modified response but is omitted from the response
sent to the client.

The effective set map applies only to a final upstream response that Kubio
forwards, including a forwarded 101 Switching Protocols response and
upstream-provided 3xx, 4xx, and 5xx responses. An upstream-provided 502 or 504
is therefore modified normally. Intermediate informational responses such as
100 and 103 remain unchanged and unmodified.

responseHeaders never applies to a response generated by Kubio, even when
Kubio received an upstream response that it could not forward. This includes
the no-matching-site 404, a proxy-generated 502 or 504 caused by a connection,
TLS, timeout, protocol, or unusable-upstream-response failure, and the
server-wide OPTIONS * response.


6. Validation, failure safety, concurrency, and reload

The v0.1 strict JSON rules continue to apply. Validation additionally rejects:

- responseHeaders outside a site or route.
- A null or non-object responseHeaders value.
- A missing, null, non-object, or empty set value.
- A null or non-string set entry value.
- An invalid, case-insensitively duplicated, or proxy-managed header name.
- A value that fails environment expansion or header value validation.
- An unknown field inside responseHeaders.

Invalid responseHeaders configuration follows the v0.1 startup and reload
failure rules. Startup fails before listening. A failed reload logs an error
without expanded response header values and retains the active router,
response header policy, and backend state.

Concurrent requests must be safe, and applying responseHeaders to one response
must not change the headers produced for another response.

On a successful reload, new requests use the new response header policy after
the atomic router swap. In-flight requests finish with the policy from the
router that accepted them. Backend selectors reset under the v0.2 rules even
when only responseHeaders changed. The listener and all other reload behavior
remain unchanged.


7. Deferred features

Response header removal, additive response header values, multiple configured
values for one header, and operation ordering are deferred to v0.5. Every other
candidate from the previous v0.4 proposal is also carried forward to v0.5.
