Kubio kubio.json v0.5 Specification
Status: Agreed specification
Base: v0.4


1. Scope

v0.5 extends responseHeaders with response header removal, additive values, and
multiple ordered values for set and add. It also defines operation and
site-to-route ordering.

These are the only features added by v0.5. All v0.4 behavior remains unchanged
when the new forms are not used, and every valid v0.4 configuration remains
valid in v0.5.


2. Configuration

A site or route responseHeaders object may contain one or more of set, add, and
remove:

    {
      "listen": ":8080",
      "sites": [
        {
          "hosts": ["example.com"],
          "target": "http://app:3000",
          "responseHeaders": {
            "remove": ["Server", "X-Legacy"],
            "set": {
              "Cache-Control": ["private", "no-store"],
              "X-Proxy": "kubio"
            },
            "add": {
              "Vary": ["Accept-Encoding", "Origin"]
            }
          },
          "routes": [
            {
              "path": "/private/*",
              "responseHeaders": {
                "remove": ["X-Proxy"],
                "add": {
                  "X-Proxy": ["kubio-private", "audited"],
                  "Set-Cookie": [
                    "area=private; Path=/; Secure",
                    "theme=dark; Path=/; Secure"
                  ]
                }
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

responseHeaders remains valid only on site and route objects. When present, it
must be a non-null JSON object containing at least one of these fields:

- set: a non-null, non-empty object mapping header names to configured values.
- add: a non-null, non-empty object mapping header names to configured values.
- remove: a non-empty array of header-name strings.

A configured value in set or add is either:

- One JSON string, representing one field value.
- A non-empty JSON array of strings, representing multiple field values in
  array order.

An empty string is a valid field value. An empty value array is invalid and
does not mean removal. A set or add object with no entries and a remove array
with no entries are also invalid. Use remove to remove a header.

Unknown responseHeaders fields are configuration errors. The declaration order
of set, add, and remove in the JSON object has no effect on behavior.


3. Header names, values, and environment expansion

3.1 Header names and duplicates

Header names use the v0.4 syntax rules and are compared case-insensitively
everywhere in responseHeaders. Configured spelling does not determine the
field-name spelling used on the downstream wire.

Within one responseHeaders object:

- Each set object must have case-insensitively unique header names.
- Each add object must have case-insensitively unique header names.
- Each remove array must have case-insensitively unique header names.
- The same case-insensitive name may appear in different operations. This is
  valid and the ordering rules in section 4 determine the result.

The same case-insensitive name may also appear at both site and route level.
Exact duplicate JSON object keys remain errors under the v0.1 strict JSON
rules.

Configured field values are not compared or deduplicated. Equal strings within
one array, in different operations, at site and route level, or already present
in the upstream response remain separate values unless a later remove or set
operation removes them.

The following names remain managed by the proxy and cannot appear in set, add,
or remove, regardless of case:

- Connection
- Proxy-Connection
- Keep-Alive
- Proxy-Authenticate
- Proxy-Authorization
- Transfer-Encoding
- TE
- Trailer
- Upgrade
- Content-Length

All other valid HTTP field names, including Set-Cookie, may be used.

3.2 Values and environment expansion

Every set and add string, including every array element, follows the v0.4
response-header value rules:

- The v0.1 ${NAME} expansion is performed once while loading kubio.json.
- An unset environment variable is a configuration error; a set but empty
  variable is valid.
- Shell-style \${NAME} represents the literal ${NAME}. In JSON the escaped
  form is written as "\\${NAME}".
- Expansion is not recursive.
- Each resulting string is validated independently after expansion and must
  not contain carriage return, line feed, DEL, or another invalid control
  character.

Expansion does not split one string into multiple values. A string remains one
field value even when it contains commas. Array order and duplicate values are
preserved after expansion.

Header names and remove entries do not support environment-variable expansion.
Response header values are sent to clients, so operators must not place secrets
in responseHeaders.

Kubio validates generic HTTP field-name and field-value syntax. It does not
validate field-specific grammar or cardinality. Operators are responsible for
ensuring each configured value is valid for its field and intended use.


4. Operation, inheritance, and value ordering

Kubio applies responseHeaders to the initial header fields of a final upstream
response. It starts with the field values that v0.4 would otherwise forward,
then applies policies in this fixed order:

1. Apply the selected site's responseHeaders, if present.
2. Apply the selected route's responseHeaders, if a route is selected and the
   route has one.

Within each site or route policy, apply operations in this fixed order:

1. remove
2. set
3. add

Each operation has the following case-insensitive behavior for a named header:

- remove deletes every current field value for the name.
- set deletes every current field value for the name, then inserts the
  configured value or values in configured order.
- add retains every current field value in its current relative order, then
  appends the configured value or values in configured order. If the header is
  absent, add creates it.

The order of names within an operation has no observable meaning. The order of
values for one name does: existing values precede added values, array elements
retain their declared order, and site results precede values added by the
route.

Sequential site-then-route application gives route policies these effects:

- A route remove deletes upstream values and all values produced by the site.
- A route set replaces upstream values and all values produced by the site.
- A route add appends to the result produced by the site.
- Names not changed by the route retain the site's result.

Only the selected route contributes a policy. Method-ineligible and otherwise
unselected routes contribute nothing. If no route is selected, only the site
policy applies. If responseHeaders is absent at both levels, no response header
operation is performed.

For example, suppose an upstream response has X-Trace values ["upstream-1",
"upstream-2"]. This site and route policy:

    site remove: X-Trace
    site set:    X-Trace = ["site-1", "site-2"]
    site add:    X-Trace = "site-3"
    route add:   X-Trace = ["route-1", "route-2"]

produces the ordered logical values ["site-1", "site-2", "site-3",
"route-1", "route-2"]. If the route also removes X-Trace, its remove runs
before its add and the result is ["route-1", "route-2"].

For configurations using only the v0.4 set string form, site set followed by
route set is equivalent to the v0.4 effective-set overlay: a route value
replaces the same case-insensitive site name, and every other site value is
retained.


5. Set-Cookie and multiple values

Set-Cookie follows the same operation ordering as every other configurable
header:

- set replaces all existing Set-Cookie values with the configured values.
- add appends configured Set-Cookie values after existing values.
- remove removes all Set-Cookie values present at that point.

Each configured string is one complete Set-Cookie field value. Multiple
Set-Cookie values remain separate and retain their logical value order; Kubio
does not combine them into one comma-separated value. Kubio does not split a
value at commas, parse cookie names or attributes, resolve conflicting cookies,
or deduplicate equal values. Configured arrays are therefore the way to set or
add multiple cookies, and their order follows section 4.


6. Trailers

responseHeaders modifies only the initial field values of a final upstream
response. It never modifies response trailers.

For each announced upstream trailer name, Kubio inspects only the
responseHeaders policies of the selected site and selected route, if any. If
either policy references that name in remove, set, or add, every operation for
that name in both policies is skipped. The upstream initial values and trailer
for that name follow the v0.4 behavior unchanged. Unselected routes are not
inspected and have no effect. Operations for other names still apply normally.

An unannounced trailer discovered after the response body is forwarded
unchanged. It does not undo, repeat, or otherwise alter operations already
applied to initial header values with the same name.


7. Response scope and downstream filtering

The ordered policy is applied after Kubio receives a final upstream response
and before the response's initial headers are sent to the client. It applies to
every final upstream response that Kubio forwards, including:

- A forwarded 101 Switching Protocols response.
- Upstream-provided 3xx, 4xx, and 5xx responses.
- An upstream-provided 502 or 504 response.

Intermediate informational responses, including 100 Continue and 103 Early
Hints, are not modified.

responseHeaders never applies to a response generated by Kubio. This includes
the no-matching-site 404, the server-wide OPTIONS * response, and a
proxy-generated 502 or 504 caused by a connection, TLS, timeout, protocol, or
unusable-upstream-response failure. Receiving an upstream response before
generating such an error does not make the policy apply.

The policy does not change the response status, body, or trailers. Applying it
does not buffer response bodies or alter Kubio's streaming or WebSocket upgrade
paths. Configured header values may nevertheless affect application behavior,
including SSE or WebSocket semantics.

After the ordered operations, normal downstream HTTP status and protocol rules
still determine serialization. The downstream response may canonicalize field
names, combine multiple values when the field permits combination, or suppress
fields. Configured values do not override those rules or guarantee a particular
number of wire header lines. For example, configured Content-Type values are
present in the logical response headers for a 304 Not Modified response but are
omitted from the response sent to the client. Multiple Set-Cookie values remain
separate and in logical value order during downstream serialization.


8. Validation, failure safety, concurrency, and reload

The v0.1 strict JSON rules continue to apply. The v0.4 validation rules continue
except where sections 2 and 3 replace them with the new responseHeaders shapes
and value forms. Validation additionally rejects:

- responseHeaders outside a site or route.
- A null or non-object responseHeaders value.
- An empty responseHeaders object or one containing none of set, add, and
  remove.
- An unknown field inside responseHeaders.
- A present set or add that is null, is not an object, or is empty.
- An invalid, case-insensitively duplicated, or proxy-managed set or add name.
- A set or add value that is neither a string nor a non-empty array of strings.
- A null, non-string, nested-array, or otherwise invalid array element.
- A set or add string that fails environment expansion or post-expansion
  header-value validation.
- A present remove that is null, is not an array, or is empty.
- A null, non-string, invalid, case-insensitively duplicated, or proxy-managed
  remove entry.

A name appearing in different operations or at both site and route level is
valid and must not be rejected as a duplicate.

Invalid responseHeaders configuration follows the v0.4 startup and reload
failure rules. Startup fails before listening. A failed reload logs a sanitized
error and retains the complete active configuration and response-header
behavior. No part of an invalid configuration becomes active.

Startup and reload errors and logs must not include configured response-header
value strings, expanded values, or environment-variable values. They may
identify the configuration location, header name, array index, environment
variable name, and category of error.

The v0.4 concurrency and successful-reload rules apply unchanged to every new
operation and value form. Applying a policy to one response must not alter
another response. New and in-flight requests retain the v0.4 reload behavior;
backend selection, listener behavior, and all other reload behavior remain
unchanged.


9. Backward compatibility

Every valid v0.4 configuration is valid in v0.5 without modification:

- The v0.4 responseHeaders object containing one non-empty set object remains
  valid.
- Every v0.4 string set value still represents exactly one field value,
  including an empty string.
- Header validation, managed names, environment expansion, announced-trailer
  handling, response scope, downstream filtering, and reload behavior retain
  their v0.4 results for the v0.4 shape.
- Site and selected-route set-only policies produce the same final values as
  the v0.4 case-insensitive set overlay.


10. Deferred features

v0.5 does not add response trailer modification, conditional response-header
policies, request-header removal or addition, or response-header policies for
Kubio-generated or intermediate responses.

Every remaining candidate from the pre-Phase-A v0.5 proposal is carried
unchanged into the v0.6 proposal.
