Kubio kubio.json v0.7 Specification
Status: Agreed specification
Base: v0.6


1. Scope

v0.7 adds optional structured access logging. The only new configuration field
is the top-level boolean `log`. When enabled, Kubio attempts to write one JSON
object per completed request to standard output; failed writes may drop it.

This is the complete v0.7 configuration scope. Log sinks, alternate formats,
field customization, sampling, metrics, health endpoints, and reload-status
endpoints remain deferred. Every valid v0.6 configuration remains valid and
keeps access logging disabled.

The short `log` name is intentional. Kubio has not had a stable release, and no
longer-named or compatibility alias is introduced.


2. Configuration

`log` is optional at the top level of kubio.json:

    {
      "listen": ":8080",
      "log": true,
      "sites": [
        {
          "hosts": ["example.com"],
          "target": "http://app:3000"
        }
      ]
    }

When absent or false, request access logs are disabled. When true, the fixed
v0.7 JSON access log described below is enabled. `log` does not control Kubio's
existing startup, reload, watcher, or fatal operational messages; those remain
plain text on standard error.

`log` is valid only at the top level. It must be a non-null JSON boolean. It
does not support environment-variable expansion. No `accessLog`, `logging`, or
other alias is accepted.


3. Logged request scope

When enabled, Kubio builds and attempts to emit exactly one access record for
every request that enters the active router and finishes or aborts its handler
execution. This includes:

- A request forwarded to a direct target or named backend.
- A request that succeeds after a v0.6 backend retry.
- An upstream-provided response of any terminal status.
- A Kubio-generated 404, 502, or 504 response.
- The server-wide OPTIONS * response.
- A streaming, SSE, or upgraded request when its handler eventually returns.
- A handler execution that panics; Kubio logs it and then preserves the
  existing panic behavior.

Failed v0.6 attempts do not create separate records. One downstream request
always produces at most one access record, regardless of target count,
informational responses, or retries.

A request uses the `log` setting of the router that accepted it. A long-lived
request is logged only after its handler returns, even if a successful reload
has activated a new router in the meantime.

Go's HTTP server normally handles OPTIONS * before invoking its configured
handler. When v0.7 logging is active or inactive, Kubio instead passes that
request through the currently loaded router and reproduces the existing 200
response with Content-Length: 0 there. This preserves the v0.1 wire behavior
while making the router generation selected at dispatch responsible for the
record. The existing bounded discard of an OPTIONS * request body is retained.


4. JSON record

Each record is one compact JSON object followed by one newline. It has exactly
these fields:

    {
      "time": "2026-08-02T09:15:30.123456789Z",
      "method": "GET",
      "host": "example.com",
      "path": "/api/users%2Factive",
      "proto": "HTTP/1.1",
      "peer": "192.0.2.10",
      "status": 200,
      "bytes": 1234,
      "durationUs": 827
    }

Consumers must not depend on JSON object key order. Field meanings are:

- `time`: UTC completion time in RFC 3339 Nano format.
- `method`: request method exactly as received.
- `host`: request Host exactly as received, including a port when present.
- `path`: escaped request path. It is `/` when the URL has an empty path.
- `proto`: request protocol string as received, such as `HTTP/1.1`.
- `peer`: the directly connected peer IP without its port. It is an empty
  string when RemoteAddr cannot be parsed as an IP endpoint.
- `status`: first terminal status observed by Kubio, implicit 200, or the
  synthetic panic status defined in section 5.
- `bytes`: response-body bytes successfully written through the HTTP
  ResponseWriter, excluding response headers and trailers.
- `durationUs`: elapsed handler duration in whole microseconds, rounded down.

`path` never includes the query string or fragment. v0.7 also omits request and
response headers, cookies, bodies, authenticated identity, forwarded client
chains, route configuration, backend names, upstream target addresses, and
transport error details. This fixed omission avoids logging common secret
locations by default.

The `peer` field intentionally represents the direct connection and does not
interpret X-Forwarded-For, Forwarded, or `trustProxies`. A derived client-IP
field remains deferred.

All string values are encoded with standard JSON escaping. A request value
cannot inject a new record or make the output invalid JSON.


5. Status and byte observation

Kubio observes the response without changing its HTTP behavior:

- The first terminal WriteHeader status is recorded.
- Nonterminal 100 through 199 responses other than 101 are not the final
  recorded status. A later terminal status is recorded.
- 101 Switching Protocols is terminal and is recorded as 101.
- A Write before a terminal WriteHeader records the implicit status 200.
- A Flush or FlushError that causes the underlying writer to commit headers
  records implicit status 200, regardless of the returned flush error.
- A normal handler return without a terminal WriteHeader or body also records
  200, matching net/http's implicit response.
- Repeated terminal WriteHeader calls do not replace the first terminal status.

`bytes` is the sum of successful byte counts returned by ResponseWriter.Write.
It includes bytes written before a later write error. It excludes header and
trailer bytes and any bytes exchanged directly over a hijacked connection after
the HTTP upgrade. Kubio's only v0.7 hijack path follows a validated upstream 101
response. A successful Hijack with no previously observed terminal status
therefore records 101; a failed Hijack does not. An upgraded request normally
records status 101 and zero HTTP body bytes, and v0.7 does not count tunneled
traffic.

The observing writer must preserve every capability of the underlying
ResponseWriter used by Kubio. It must provide response-controller unwrapping,
observe and forward FlushError and Hijack, preserve streaming and trailer
headers, and leave any underlying capability reachable through Unwrap.
Enabling access logs must not buffer a complete request or response and must
not break WebSocket, SSE, trailers, or 1xx forwarding.

If a panic occurs before any terminal response is observed, the access record
uses a synthetic status 500 for logging only. net/http may close the connection
without sending a 500 response. If a terminal status was already observed,
that status is retained. Kubio then re-panics with the original value so the
existing net/http panic and connection behavior is unchanged.


6. Output, concurrency, and failures

Access records are written only to standard output. Existing operational logs
remain on standard error, so the two formats are separate under the default
process streams.

Concurrent requests may finish in any order. One process-wide serializer is
shared across all active and retired router generations. Successful complete
JSON lines therefore never interleave with another Kubio access record. Their
order is successful write-lock order and is not guaranteed to match request
arrival order.

An access-log encoding or standard-output write failure must not change the
HTTP response, retry a request, terminate Kubio, or expose request data in a
client response. Kubio does not retry the write and continues. A partial or
failed write may leave a truncated line prefix in standard output; that record
is dropped, and JSON validity, line isolation, and ordering guarantees apply
only to successful writes. v0.7 adds no log queue, buffer, rotation, retry,
backpressure policy, or delivery guarantee. A slow standard output may delay
completion of a request handler that is being logged.


7. Reload and disabled-path behavior

The v0.1 atomic reload rules apply. Invalid `log` configuration fails startup
or rejects a reload while preserving the entire active router and its logging
behavior.

A successful reload may enable or disable access logs without restarting the
listener. New requests use the new router's setting. In-flight requests finish
under the old router and emit or omit their record according to the old
setting. Reload itself does not emit an access record.

When logging is disabled, Kubio must not wrap the ResponseWriter, capture a
start timestamp, build a record, encode JSON, or serialize on an access-log
lock. The disabled request path therefore retains v0.6 behavior and has no
logging-specific per-request allocation or synchronization.


8. Validation summary

In addition to the prior specifications, configuration loading rejects:

- `log` set to null, a string, number, array, or object.
- `log` placed inside a site, route, backend, timeout, or response policy.
- An unknown alias such as `accessLog` or `logging`.
- A duplicate top-level `log` key under the existing strict JSON rules.

Invalid startup configuration exits before listening. An invalid reload logs a
sanitized operational error to standard error and retains the active access-log
setting.


9. Deferred features

v0.7 does not add configurable log outputs or formats, custom fields, query or
header logging, sampling, redaction rules, request IDs, forwarded client-IP
derivation, per-attempt logs, metrics, health endpoints, or admin endpoints.
These and every candidate not selected from the former v0.7 proposal move to
v0.8.
